---
layout: post
title: RFM model as a Simple Way to Evaluate Customer Value
image: "/posts/rfm-clv-img.png"
tags: [RFM, Customer Value, Python]
---


The goal of this project was to rank the customers of an insurance company to improve customer care. The RFM model (Recency, Frequency, and Monetary value), which evaluates customers based on the recency, frequency, and monetary value of their purchases, was identified as a simple yet highly effective and easily interpretable technique.

# Table of contents

- [00. Project Overview](#overview-main)
    - [Adapting the standard RFM model to suit our business invironment](#overview-context)
    - [Results & Discussion](#overview-results)
- [01. Data Overview & Preparation](#data-overview)
- [02. RFM Model: Creating Recency, Product Ownershp and Monetary Value Dimensions](#applying-models)
- [04. Analysing The Results](#chi-square-results)
- [05. Discussion](#discussion)

___

# Project Overview  <a name="overview-main"></a>

### Adapting the standard RFM model to suit our business invironment <a name="overview-context"></a>

Often, it is sufficient for a company’s marketing department to rank customers by their value to the company, rather than calculating the exact dollar amount the customers are likely to spend. This was the case with my client, Netrisk.hu, the largest Hungarian insurance brokerage company.

Since insurance industry typically operates in a subscription company-customer relationship, dimensions like recency and frequency are not the best modes of categorizing and ranking customers value from the company's point of view. In a subscription business all time-related features become awkward or even meaningless. Recency has minor importance since most contracts are kept renewed automatically. Frequency is also problematic because frequent contract renewald do not necessary come together with higher spending. As a consequence of these facts I modified the standard RFM model to align with the operational context of my client. I kept monetary value in the model and replaced recency and frequncy with number and type of product ownership of the customer. With this step I think that the standard RFM framework was tailored to better fit the unique aspects of the company's goals.

<br>

### Results & Discussion <a name="overview-results"></a>

<br>
With the RFM scores in hand, the company will develop a segmented customer care strategy, prioritizing high-value customers with focused attention while allocating minimal effort to low-value customers.

<br>

___

<br>
# Data Overview & Preparation  <a name="data-overview"></a>


<br>
#### Base table creation:

<br>
##### Population to be analyzed:
- I extracted the table that contains all contracts from the company's relational database. (Customers identities are deduplicated in the system already.) 

<br>
##### Filtering:
-	MTPL (Motor Third Party Liability Insurance), CASCO, Home inssurance contracts
-	Default on payment clients excluded
-	only private persons included

<br>
##### Created features:
-	**sum_alltime_CASCO_MTPL_HOME_annual_fee_per_user**: the length of relationship measured in number of years multiplied by the last annual fee. If the contract is still active then the end date of the contract is the current date;
-	sum_current_CASCO_MTPL_HOME_annual_fee_per_user: in case of an active contract the last annual fee;
-	current_num_of_insured_cars: number of vehicles that are covered at the moment of analysis;
-	length_of_relatonship_day: length of relatonship in days;
-	recency_cat: type of active insurance products the customer has: list of values = 1. only MTPL, 2. only CASCO, 3. only Home, 4. MTPL and CASCO, 5. MTPL and Home, 6. CASCO and Home, 7. all 3 types of insurance product, 8. has no any active insurance contract.

<br>
##### Detected outliers:
-	deleting customers having over 2.000.000 HUF cumulated annual fee amount;
-	deleting customers having over 10.000 days length of relatonship;

<br>
##### Aggregating the contract-level data into customer-level:
-	the following mysql snippet shows simple it is to get the customer-level data for the next steps:

```sql

DROP TABLE IF EXISTS rfm_data;
CREATE TABLE IF NOT EXISTS rfm_data
SELECT 	b.user_id_dedupl,
		coalesce(ROUND(SUM(b.annual_fee*DATEDIFF(coverage_end,coverage_start)/365),0),0) AS sum_alltime_CASCO_MTPL_HOME_annual_fee_per_user,
		coalesce(sum(CASE WHEN status = 'active' THEN b.annual_fee END),0) as sum_current_CASCO_MTPL_HOME_annual_fee_per_user,		
		count(DISTINCT b.reg_plate_number) AS num_of_insured_cars,
		count(DISTINCT CASE WHEN status = 'active' THEN b.reg_plate_number END) as current_num_of_insured_cars,
		case 
		when MIN(DATEDIFF(CURRENT_DATE,coverage_end)) = 0 then 
			case 
				when MTPL_active > 0 and CASCO_active = 0 and HOME_active = 0 then 'M'
				when MTPL_active = 0 and CASCO_active > 0 and HOME_active = 0 then 'C'
				when MTPL_active = 0 and CASCO_active = 0 and HOME_active > 0 then 'H'
				when MTPL_active > 0 and CASCO_active > 0 and HOME_active = 0 then 'MC'
				when MTPL_active > 0 and CASCO_active = 0 and HOME_active > 0 then 'MH'
				when MTPL_active = 0 and CASCO_active > 0 and HOME_active > 0 then 'CH'
				when MTPL_active > 0 and CASCO_active > 0 and HOME_active > 0 then 'MCH'
			end
		when MIN(DATEDIFF(CURRENT_DATE,coverage_end)) > 0 then 'canceled'
		end	as recency_cat,
		DATEDIFF(MAX(coverage_end),MIN(coverage_start)) AS length_of_relatonship_day,
		case 
		when last_channel = 'online' then 'online'
		else 'offline'
		end	as last_channel_cat
FROM base_table b
GROUP BY b.user_id_dedupl
;

```

___

<br>
# RFM Model: Creating Recency, Product Ownershp and Monetary Value Dimensions <a name="applying-models"></a>

<br>
#### RM_Scores: Creating Terciles

RM_Score = recency_cat + m1_tercile, where m1_tercile is the a sum_alltime_CASCO_MTPL_HOME_annual_fee_per_user column assinged into terciles. For instance:

K1 = recency_cat[only MTPL] + m1_tercile[customer is in lowest spending tercile]


<br>
#### The Python Code that Creates RFM-dimensions

```python




# Contingency tables for products
all_clients = np.array([[11426, 2775],
                         [2785, 724]])

baby_craving = np.array([[508, 112],
                         [62, 16]])

personal_loan = np.array([[8909, 2163],
                           [2763, 706]])

mortgage_loan = np.array([[4459, 1136],
                           [102, 38]])

commodity_credit = np.array([[254, 47],
                           [221, 57]])


# Perform chi-square test of independence and print results for baby craving
perform_chi_square_test_and_print_results(baby_craving, "Baby Craving")

# Perform chi-square test of independence and print results for personal loan
perform_chi_square_test_and_print_results(personal_loan, "Personal Loan")

# Perform chi-square test of independence and print results for mortgage loan
perform_chi_square_test_and_print_results(mortgage_loan, "Mortgage Loan")

# Perform chi-square test of independence and print results for commodity credit
perform_chi_square_test_and_print_results(commodity_credit, "Commodity Credit")

```
<br>
Based upon our observed values, we can give this all some context with the late payment rate of each group.  We get:

All Clients:
* Target Group (Reminder sent): **19.6%** late payment rate
* Control Group (Reminder NOT sent): **20.7%** late payment rate

Baby Craving:
* Target Group (Reminder sent): **10.9%** late payment rate
* Control Group (Reminder NOT sent): **12.5%** late payment rate

Personal Loan:
* Target Group (Reminder sent): **23.7%** late payment rate
* Control Group (Reminder NOT sent): **24.6%** late payment rate

Mortgage Loan:
* Target Group (Reminder sent): **2.2%** late payment rate
* Control Group (Reminder NOT sent): **3.2%** late payment rate

Commodity Credit:
* Target Group (Reminder sent): **46.5%** late payment rate
* Control Group (Reminder NOT sent): **54.8%** late payment rate


<br>
From this, we can see that being left our from the reminder campaign leads to a higher late payment for each loan product.  The results from our Chi-Square Test will provide us more information about how confident we can be that this difference is robust, or if it might have occured by chance: 


All Clients:
* Chi-square statistic: 2.12
* P-value: 0.146

Baby Craving:
* Chi-square statistic: 0.277
* P-value: 0.598

Personal Loan:
* Chi-square statistic: 1.11
* P-value: 0.292

Mortgage Loan:
* Chi-square statistic: 3.924
* P-value: 0.048

Commodity Credit:
* Chi-square statistic: 2.344
* P-value: 0.126

<br>
The critical value for our specified Acceptance Criteria of 0.05 is **3.84**

<br>
**Note** When applying the Chi-Square Test above, we use the parameter *correction = False* which means we are applying what is known as the *Yate's Correction* which is applied when your Degrees of Freedom is equal to one.  This correction helps to prevent overestimation of statistical signficance in this case.


<br> 
#### Joint Effect with Treatment - Settlement Type and Age Group

After assessing the effect of reminder sending on late payment behavior within the whole campaing base and within product types, we were also interested in seeing what impact the Settlement Type and Age Group of campaign participants had on the response output, late paymentbehavior. In other words, we need to know if Settlement Type and/or Age Group and treatment jointly affect the campaign response. The effectiveness of the treatment could vary by settlement type. For example, a promotional campaign might be more effective in urban areas than rural ones due to differences in access to payment facilities, economic activity, or consumer behavior. Or demographic characteristics may have inherent characteristics that significantly influence payment behaviors — such as economic conditions, demographic profiles, or logistical factors that affect how promotions or treatments are received.

___

<br>
# Analysing The Results <a name="chi-square-results"></a>

From the results above we can see that only the resulting p-value for the Mortgage Loan of **0.048** is *lower* than our Acceptance Criteria of 0.05 then we will _reject_ Null Hypothesis for this product and conclude that there is indeed significant difference between the late payment rates of those who received reminder and those who don't.

For the entire campaign base and all other products, Baby Craving, Personal Loan, and Commodity Credit we will _retain_ the Null Hypothesis and conclude that there is no significant difference between the late payment rates of those who received reminder and those who don't.

___

<br>
# Discussion <a name="discussion"></a>

While we saw that the recipients of payment reminder had a lower late payment rate (19.6%) than the control group (20.7%) it appears that this difference is not significant, at least at our Acceptance Criteria of 0.05. We got the same results within the universe of certain loan products, except Mongage Loans where the reminder had a significant impact on due payment bahavior.  

Without running this Hypothesis Test, the client may have concluded that they should always look to go with reminder emails - and from what we've seen in this test, that may not be a great decision.  It would result in them spending more for eDM, but not *necessarily* gaining any extra revenue as a result.
